# Building a local cache that maps chat history prefixes to the encrypted reasoning items in order to benefit from prompt caching utilization when using reasoning models with the new Responses API

## Motivation
Delphyne will support the new OpenAI Responses API soon. The most important reason behind that was that the old Chat Completions API cannot utilize prompt caching when using reasoning models, because it discards reasoning tokens. With the support of the Responses API in order to utilize the cache when using reasoning models, the reasoning items (either in the form of id's or encrypted content) should be sent to the API together with chat history when continuing the same conversation. (Though OpenAI says that the reasoning state of the model can only be persisted across multiple tool calls that follow the same user message and not across multiple conversation turns between user and assistant)

## Rationale
- Usage of the encrypted reasoning content over reasoning id: 
    The encrypted content is the superior choice because conversation ids and reasoning ids might be invalid earlier than the encrypted content. Since we want LLM requests to be stateless in Delphyne, we can send the whole chat history to the API and can thus just use the encrypted content over id's.   

- Building a cache instead of adding reasoning items directly to the chat history: 
    Reasoning items would pollute the conversation in exec.yaml files. Moreoever, otherwise the chat history would depend on the encrypted reasoning tokens of a specific model?

- Cache key should be LLMRequest (which has chat history, model options etc.) just before the reasoning + the content of the assistant message that accompany the reasoning. 
    Why not only chat history?: chat history alone would not suffice -> reasoning contents generated by different models are not compatible.
    Why include the message that the reasoning belongs to to the key: because possible multiple requests with the same prefix, there can be different answers  
    Should key include num_seen like LLMCache?

- Cache value should be encrypted content + some metadata that is expected by the API. 

- Assume that reasoning persists across multiple conversation turns and not just across tool calls in the same turn: 
    No harm in sending encrypted content even though cache will not be hit. And there can be a chance that caching behaviour might change?

## Specification

### models.py
- new class `ReasoningCacheKey` with fields `prefix: LLMRequest, message: str | Structured, tool_calls: tuple[ToolCall, ...]`
- new class `ReasoningMessage` to mirror OpenAI's `ResponseReasoningItemParam` which has fields 
    `id: str, summary: Sequence[Summary (text:str, type: "summary_text")], type: Literal["reasoning"], encrypted_content: str`
- new `ReasoningMessage` field for existing `LLMOutput` class
- new `list[tuple(index_of_assistant_message, ReasoningMessage)]` field for existing `LLMRequest` class 
    (this field should not be relevant to the hashable_repr of the class)
- new class `ReasoningCache` -> cache: `Cache[ReasoningCacheKey, ReasoningMessage]` similar to `LLMCache` using the infrastructure in `caching.py`.
    - so also new `load_optional_reasoning_cache(..)` which should be used in `run_strategy.py` just like `LLMCache`
- In `LLM` abstract class: 
    - `send_request` should have a `reasoning_cache` argument
- Modify `fetch_or_answer(cache: LLMCache | None, req: LLMRequest, f: Callable[[LLMRequest], LLMResponse], reasoning_cache: ReasoningCache)`:
    - check `reasoning_cache` with `ReasoningCacheKey`s created for chat prefixes (including the message and tool calls, directly before which the reasoning content is generated). 
        If hit, add the `ReasoningMessage`s to the new field of the request.
    - send the new request to the `f`, when the response comes, check the `LLMOutput` field and extract the `ReasoningMessage` and save it to the `ReasoningCache` with the key request + message.

### New
- no change to LLMRequest
- handle caching with helper functions in openai_api.py

    
### openai_api.py

- In the function `_send_final_request` of the new class `OpenAIResponsesModel`:
- During output handling: `response.output` is of type `list[ResponseFunctionToolCall | ResponseReasoningItem | ResponseOutputMessage]`. 
    We iterate over the list and match over the type and fill the fields of `LLMOutput` in the cases of tool call and output message. 
    - In case of a reasoning item, create `ReasoningMessage` and add it to the new field of `LLMOutput` 

- The new function `translate_chat_responses_api(..) -> Sequence[ResponseInputItemParam]` should have access to `list[tuple(index_of_assistant_message, ReasoningMessage)]` field of the `LLMRequest` that is being sent:
    - translate `ReasoningMessage` trivially to the dictionary format expected by the Responses API and add to the output list.


## Testing

- Create a dummy strategy that instructs LLM to send multiple tool calls.
- Test with and without reasoning cache enabled and see whether cached_tokens change across multiple tool calls 